---
headline: 'Rupert Murdoch: Big Man On Campus'
publication: 'Forbes'
position: 'Staff reporter'
---

Heading back to college this fall? Rupert Murdoch will be waiting.

In May, his Fox News subsidiary bought a minority stake in a Web
video-based college news network featuring student reporters called
Palestra.net. This fall, he'll be ramping up the partnership.

It's the latest — and boldest — move by a major media company to
capitalize on America's some 6.1 million undergrads. While outlets such
asViacom's MTVU network and privately owned Zilo Networks have gone after
university students for years, Palestra's at the front of a new wave led
by news outlets desperate to connect with young viewers.

In May, Disney's ABC News said it would open digital bureaus at some top
journalism schools. And General Electric-owned NBC News recently announced
it would be working with the New York Film Academy to train students in
digital journalism.

Palestra.net goes further. Focusing on news, sports, business and
entertainment features, it pays student reporters $240 to$300 to produce
three news packages a week for the Web site — and Fox's cable networks.

More than 10 pieces of student-reported Palestra content a week should be
running on both the Fox News Channel and Fox Business Network by the fall
as the school year restarts and the presidential campaigns swing into high
gear. And founder Joe Weasel — a former on-air journalist for NBC
affiliate WCMH-TV in Columbus, Ohio — says he began talking with Fox's
local affiliates last week about placing Palestra content on their Web
sites around the country, which could lead to on-air spots.

Fox does not editorially preselect his network's coverage, says Weasel.
Like most news organizations, reporters dig up stories that are pitched to
Palestra producers, some of which are further pitched to Fox. And coverage
diverges from the stilted accounts that older, professional reporters
often get from students when they arrive on campus for stories about the
student vote.

Palestra's reporters aren't just telling the stories — they are the story.
When Weasel hired student reporters Sarah Barga, Sarah Jane Dugger and
Chri Kaechele as summer interns to create a marketing campaign for
Palestra, Fox Business Anchor Alexis Glick had them brought to New York
for a segment on the internship. And while there, Weasel says the three
had a meeting with senior Fox officials about how they saw digital media
developing.

The relationship with Fox evolved in November 2007 partially from the
site's content — and partially from luck. When the campus of Pepperdine
University was burning along with Malibu, Calif., wildfires in October
2007, Palestra reporter Stephan Holt (son of broadcast journalist Lester
Holt) dispatched a 30-second news spot about where, and how, he and fellow
students were being sequestered on campus for their safety.

Weasel says the coverage helped catch the attention of Joel Cheatwood,
newly minted Fox News senior vice president of development. He had already
been introduced to Palestra while working for CNN, as the site was
providing CNN.com free music coverage in 2006. While Weasel says the Cable
News Network hadn't seen his student demographic as important, Fox did,
and after the wildfire coverage, a content partnership with the News Corp.
entity began.

For his part, Cheatwood says advertisers want the news business to learn
how to reach young audiences not tuning into traditional broadcast and
cable news programs — and to develop stories they value. Palestra's
already wide reach should help with that, as well as provide Fox a new
pipeline for talent.

Today, Palestra fields a staff of 125 reporters at 101 schools around the
country, placing News Corp. right at the heart of the nation's student
population Weasel says that's a huge advertising market. Palestra viewers
are growing quickly, with over two million people seeing it between Fox's
various channels and online distribution. He would not provide any numbers
but says viewer growth online is accelerating quickly following the deal.

And though Weasel says it's too early to see the results, Murdoch's
organization has wasted no time in taking advantage of that access. Fox
News too over Palestra's ad sales around June, giving it access to new
audiences and likely a slew of new sponsors who are attracted to them.
Weasel declined to say how ad revenues would be split and said he could
not predict whether a full acquisition by Fox was in his company's future.

While Palestra incorporated software-based video ad-serving technology
following the Fox investment, the student network previously focused on
sponsorships over ad insertions based on automatic placement. For
instance, Pepsi has sponsored the show "Music at the Palestra" via a title
screen.

This isn't quite network news, though, as Weasel also says a sponsor like
Pepsi may have its products placed within the show, with reporters often
wearing clothing with a Pepsi logo. Weasel acknowledges that the technique
doesn't work for every type of program — for instance, hard news — but the
one-time Ohio State University journalism professor says the tactic is
fine for others.

There's another likely reason for News Corp.'s interest in Palestra:
Facebook. The news network gives Murdoch a direct path to his MySpace
rival. With student reporters using their own Facebook pages — and a
Palestra.net company page — to post links and information about their
online and offline news reports, News Corp. gains a pathway to Facebook's
well-to-do, upwardly mobile college and university student users. Not bad
for a freshman.
