---
headline: Putting Newspapers on Trial
publication: Forbes
position: 'Staff reporter'
---

Sam Zell was sued in Federal Court in California yesterday by a group of
current and former Tribune Company employees. They did a lot more than go
after the billionaire they say ruined their company — you could make the
case that they've put the fast-changing newspaper business on trial, too.

The group says Zell, the Chicago real estate mogul-turned-newspaper-titan,
has done nothing but run down Tribune since buying it last year. But the
suit is so much more than an angry lashing by frustrated journalists. To
the group of well-known reporters that include two Pulitzer Prize winners,
the indictment of Zell is an angry answer to Wall Street's pessimism about
their industry.

"The problem is not with the product, the problem is monetizing the
product online," says Dan Neil, a five-year employee of the
Tribune-ownedLos Angeles Times. "It's not journalism's problem, it might
be publishing's problem." Neil won the Pulitzer Prize for criticism in 2004.

Leading the charge from the LA Times newsroom, Neil and his cadre of
plaintiffs are claiming various violations of the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act (ERISA). Essentially, they allege that as members of
Tribune's Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) — which became the legal
owne of Tribune during a complicated buyout in April of 2007 — Zell has
breached his duty of loyalty to Tribune's employees. The group has asked
the court to certify the case as a class action.

Zell took over Tribune last year by taking it private in an $8.2 billion
dollar deal that left the company with more than$13 billion dollars in
debt. In a statement Wednesday, Zell said the lawsuit "is filled with
frivolous and unfounded allegations, and I hope every partner in this
company is as outraged as I am at having to spend the time and money
required to defend ourselves against it."

A case like this seems inevitable. Zell has been something of a lighting
rod for all that journalists fear about the future of newspapers since
taking over Tribune. He has evaluated reporters by how many column inches
they produce, turned editorial publications like the Los Angeles Times
Magazine over to advertiser control and laid off at least 1,000 employees.

And by all accounts, he has done it with little humility, famously cursing
at a South FloridaSun-Sentinel staff member who challenged him in January
during an open question and answer session with employees. "Zell has a
reputation of being a very, very difficult person to deal with," says
Neil. Yet, the long-time reporter admits he has never tried to contact
Zell about his grievances, saying such an effort would be futile.

Instead, Neil was sucked into this case in July when the law firm that
filed it, Cotchett, Pitre & McCarthy, quietly approached him about
joining. The firm had been working on the suit for some months along with
plaintiff Henry Weinstein, a lawyer and 30-year veteran of theLA Times who
covered the legal beat before accepting a Tribune buyout this year.
Cotchett is no stranger to big class action cases. The 27-lawyer firm
champions its history of working on filing big claims, such as class
actions alleging price fixing among ocean liners and complaints against
Merrill Lynch for hiding subprim loan losses.

If all goes well, this case could be a major talking point for the firm.
Toluca Lake, Calif.-based Dish Communications, which describes itself as a
boutique PR firm, was distributing copies of the complaint and
coordinating interviews with Neil earlier this week. There is quite a lot
to talk about.

The ramifications of Zell's — and Tribune's — actions are defined by the
Cotchett firm as nothing short of the destruction of American democracy.
"Sam Zell exacted a severe, long-lasting damage to an institution that
citizens in a democracy rely on and require to effectively speak truth to
power," writes lead lawyer Joseph Cotchett.

Zell himself is only named in two of the complaint's eight counts. Most
counts focus on Tribune's existing and past board of directors, as well as
various trustees for the ESOP. The complicated structure of the multi-part
buyout deal may be the reason why. Zell was only personally involved in it
during an early stage loan to Tribune that funded the repurchase of some
of its stock.

At that time, he allegedly convinced the ESOP to pay too much for Tribune
in acquiring the rest of its public stock — $38 per share versus a more
reasonable value of something under$10.

"The factual scenario is something of a novel one," says Ian Downes, an
ERISA litigator with the law firm Dechert. He says cases like this one
could drag on for years and can result in millions of dollars in
attorney's fees for a plaintiff's firm involved in the suit.

Newspapers have been under siege since the technology bubble popped in the
late 1990s, with problems ranging from declining circulation, advertiser
consolidation, classified ads migrating online, rising newsprint costs,
bloated debt structures and, yes, over-staffing. Not to mention the rise
of Internet news.

"The industry's got enough problems not to need bad management on top of
it," says Neil. Or, Zell might say, lawsuits.
