---
headline: 'Boxee Wants To Kill Your Television'
publication: 'Forbes'
---

Avner Ronen thinks he can kill cable television. How? With software that
aggregates all the Web's video, music and media into a slick interface.

What's more, Ronen thinks he can convince broadcasters and others to
encourage cable's death by paying him a $.05 to$.10 fee every time
someone watches or listens to something his software recommends.

"We think it becomes a cable replacement for a lot of young people," says
Ronen, who has raised $1 to$3 million for his New York-based start-up,
Boxee.

Crazy? Maybe. Gutsy? You bet. While there's no shortage of people looking
to steal a television advertising market worth some \$65 billion, Boxee's
five founders — who learned their trade working in the Israeli army —
think they can take advantage of content producers' need to find audiences
by creating what is essentially a television with limitless channels and
offerings that's easy to use. Kind of a personalized YouTube on your
desktop.

Boxee's server makes recommendations to people based on their past
preferences, the media stored on their hard drives and what friends from
social networks prefer. Essentially, it "moves" content, creating an
advertising incentive for media to give him a cut of ad sales. Ronen
argues, people — particularly kids — will instantly give up cable service
if Internet media were easily aggregated in one place.

At the moment, there is little data to support his idea. But there is
plenty that shows Web video is exploding. According to a study by
Forrester Research earlier this month, 40% of Internet users watch more
than an hour of online video a week, and some 55% of them are 13 to 34
years old. ABI Research reported the number of consumers watching video in
an Internet browser doubled in the last year to some 63% in a study of 985
households; comScore said in July that 75% of all Internet users are
watching video online; and Cisco Systems recently reported its expectation
that Internet traffic for video seen on a computer will account for some
25% of all Internet traffic this year. It was 11% in 2006.

Still, Howard Horowitz, whose Horowitz Associates researches the cable and
Internet industries, says there are no real studies investigating a link
between increasing Web video consumption and canceled cable subscriptions.
"In a linear sense, it's very hard to make a prediction," he says of how
the field develops. His data show cable subscriptions for the 18 to 34 set
have only decreased 10% since 2005, usually in favor of technologies such
as digital cable. But a representative notes it's still in its early days,
and Horowitz is continuing to study the topic in greater depth.

Ronen says the future is clear. And, he says, he's already found the
people who prove the point: Apple users (he is one). The famously young,
hip group is ready to turn their iBooks and iMacs into televisions and
stereos that tap all Internet media, he says. While Apple's Front Row
tries to do it, Ronen says it fails by being tightly tied to the company's
iTunes media store. Boxee's first version has been written for the Mac.

Earlier this month, they released instructions to easily upgrade (or hack)
an AppleTV with their software. (They've also hacked Apple's remote to
work with it.) The company claims far more than 10,000 people are already
using Boxee in a private test and says a similarly sized group has signed
onto a waiting list to join them. The software goes public later this
year.

If it sounds a bit grand, it is. Despite a novel business model, Boxee's
got its share of challenges ahead. The first is that, despite its claims,
it doesn't currently aggregate all the Web's video — but it is getting
better. This week it added CBS, Comedy Central, MySpaceTV and Hulu to its
repertoire. Ronen also says Boxee's in talks with all the major networks
and content aggregators like Netflix to fix that. Why shouldn't they work
with him, argues Ronen, if he can find them viewers to increase the volume
of ad sales.

Another equally thorny problem: To access all the media stored on a hard
drive, Boxee does not run inside a Web browser. Forcing people to download
software is increasingly impossible in an Internet world that accesses
information and programs via the Web. The strategy just about killed off
Joost — a high profile Web video portal that raised \$40 million from the
likes of CBS and Viacom — earlier this year. Boxee is now working with
Joost, which recently launched a browser version, on a new partnership.

One thing is for sure, Horowitz says. The stakes are as big as Ronen
thinks. "If big media is going to be complacent, they'll lose going
forward."
