---
headline: 'How to Get Readers to Really Want You'
publication: 'Forbes'
position: 'Staff reporter'
---

Forget Anna Wintour, famed editrix of Vogue. Just like New York's Fashion
Week, which ended last Friday, she's so over. The big ideas for keeping
Vogue hot are coming from the business department down the hall — and it
is betting big on the appeal of Web television.

At the top of the list: Model.Live, a 12-episode Web video series now
playing on Vogue.TV that follows three young women as they try to break
into the business while journeying to Fashion Weeks around the world. The
show has been viewed over a million times across the Internet since
launching in late August.

Not only is there original content under the Vogue name, but there's money
behind the effort too: The show is sponsored by EXPRESS.com and produced
by IMG Sports & Entertainment. Vogue is coy about the numbers, but some
reports place production costs at $3 million. With single magazine ad
  pages going for as much as$121,000, show sponsors may be getting
exclusive access toVogue's name — in full motion video — on the cheap.

That's quite a powerful advertising pitch for the magazine industry. Faced
with declining circulation and stagnant Web strategies, print products
like Vogue are becoming online television networks. Last week, Vogue-owner
Conde Nast launched Glamour.TV for Vogue's sister magazine.

"The advertisers are pursuing what's trendy," says Rebecca McPheters, a
magazine industry consultant. "This way, the magazine publishers can say
we're aggressively growing and developing new media as well."

"Branded" shows like Model.Live are an increasingly popular route into the
Web TV business. Unlike video ads sold against editorially created Web
shows, advertisers work directly with business departments to create and
underwrite branded programs. It's a cost effective model because it
doesn't steal editors away from focusing on the print publication.

That is, after all, where Vogue still makes its money. Last year, the
Publisher's Information Bureau reported it had roughly \$419 million in
sales from some 3,201 ad pages.

Putting Vogue's business chief, publisher Tom Florio, in charge of content
named afterVogue is a powerful example of how far magazines will go to
reinvent themselves as powerhouse digital properties.

Tinkering with an editorial model that has kept Vogue printing for 116
years may be necessary. In the first six months of 2008, Vogue's paid
subscriptions fell 2.1% by dropping year-over-year to 782,397. More
troubling, Compete.com reports its Style.com Web site only had some
565,000 unique visitors in August. That's not much compared to the almost
4.8 million visitors at Glam.com, an Internet media upstart that caters to
women about topics like fashion.

A Vogue spokesperson counters that Compete’s numbers are unreliable and
says Conde Nast’s internal figures show some 1,474,340 unique visitors to
Style.com last month.

Still, what seem clear is that dangerous fault lines are forming beneath
some of the industry's biggest names. Though Florio saysVogue is set to
have its second-best year of ad sales ever, he's worried about keeping the
brand relevant for the next generation of readers. So he — not Wintour —
is creating Web shows like Model.Live with his 16-year-old daughter in
mind.

"I'm comfortable with it, because I feel that the principals of what we're
doing are based on the same principals as the brand," he says. If Wintour
objected to the content, he says he would kill it. A Conde Nast
spokesperson said that Wintour understands Vogue.TV is run by the business
department and stays informed about its programs. Wintour is attending
Fashion Weeks in Paris and Milan and was unavailable for comment.

At the helm of Vogue.TV, Florio is able to experiment with the medium in
ways Wintour can't by offering advertisers like Express a value the
magazin can't provide.

For instance, the clothing company sells clothes directly to the Vogue.TV
audience in an e-commerce store that sits beside eachModel.Live video.
Express keeps the sales in an effort to avoid diluting Wintour's
fashion-setting tastes. "What we're doing is a cost-effective business
model," says Florio.

If he can build a business off of these Web shows, the upside for Vogue
could be compelling. Web video portals are hungry to find fresh content
they can syndicate that isn't tangled up in the complex licensing rights
that often gum up deals with network or cable shows.

"I can assure you that Vogue did not give us their content for free," says
TidalTV CEO Scott Ferber. His site is one of five Web video sites on which
Model.Live is also being distributed. "They are making money on it." That
could wind up being a sweet new source of revenue forVogue.

Still, syndication fees like these are based on the reputation of Vogue
and its editors — not partners like Express. That highlights the risk:
These new efforts could dilute the Vogue brand.

"I talk about the 'elasticity of content' — how far out can you take it to
satisfy advertisers is something of a concern for sure," says Tom Hartle,
owner of the influential music magazine Spin. Also facing circulation
decline, his magazine is about to announce its own branded show about
international music that will run in 63 markets worldwide. "I think a lot
of this innovation is coming out of the business departments and that can
be problematic to the healt of the brand," he says.

For now, the point may be moot. Florio says Vogue.TV's shows couldn't
survive without the magazine's support. So, on second thought, don't
forget about Wintour just yet.
