---
headline: 'The Paperless Town'
publication: 'Forbes'
position: 'Staff reporter'
---

An odor of death clings to the newspaper industry. According to Editor &
Publisher, seven American newspapers shut down between 2003 and 2007. With
over 13,000 jobs lost from the industry over the past year, according to
online layoff tracker Paper Cuts, that number is poised to grow.

Academics and journalists predict the worst. Government will run amok,
information will not be traded and the "nagging conscience of a community"
will be lost, says Conrad Fink, the Morris chair of Newspaper Strategy and
Management at the University of Georgia.

But looking at some of the big and small communities where those seven
papers shut down shows there may be less impact than you might expect.
Many readers turned away from newspapers long ago. In the Internet age,
information overload, rather than starvation, is the main lament of most
news consumers. "What you've seen as to closures recently has been simply
marginal operation falling prey against combined competitive threats,"
says Fink.

John Leone, a former mayor of Bristol, Conn., and the president of the
Greater Bristol Chamber of Commerce, knows the feeling. His town faces the
closure of The Bristol Press, circulation 8,285. The imploding Journal
Register Company said in early November that it may close the paper, and
The Herald, circulation 9,646, of New Britain if it can't sell them.

"There's so many other ways to get your message out, I can understand the
problem of keeping [it] open," he says, though he doesn't like it — some
50 years ago, he was a paperboy for the Press. "The reality is that some
of the other newspapers in the area will probably step it up."

That's what happened to the Post-Herald in Birmingham, Ala. Owned by E.W.
Scripps Company, the 7,500 circulation afternoon daily closed in September

2005. "Certainly, losing a voice in the community has an impact, but that
      voice had become less influential as the paper had shrunk," says Tom
      Scarritt, editor of the rival Birmingham News, which has a circulation of
      137,220. His paper was handling most of the Post-Herald's non-editorial
      operations, including ad sales under a Joint Operating Agreement at the
      time.

And how did local businesses react to the closure? Maggie Krost, the News'
vice president of sales and marketing says they didn't. "I think it had no
impact on the business community at all from the perspective of being able
to reach the marketplace with advertising," she says.

In De Queen, Ark., the De Queen Daily Citizen was shut down by new owner
Lancaster Management in 1997. With a circulation of roughly 2,650, Mayor
Billy Ray McKelvey says the paper had been a labor of love of local scion
Ray Kimball for years.

De Queen's 5,765-person community loved the paper too. McKelvey, who was
once its editor and worked there for 18 years, says people used to pick it
up in the morning and sit around the local courthouse discussing the day's
events. "I can tell you the community did not like losing the daily
newspaper. There were lots of howls," he says.

But not as much changed in the aftermath as one would have thought. True,
there are no more courthouse news gatherings. And local flower shop owner
Joanie Paterson says her funeral business was cut in half by some \$10,000
because the elderly stopped learning of deaths soon enough to send
flowers. But she says she can't think of any other local businesses
similarly impacted, although folks living in the town's rural outskirts —
like her father — have trouble getting the news.

The local radio station's Web site has become a major spot for community
news, a weekly newspaper (the daily's sister paper) still operates, and
the Texarcana Gazette has stepped up its coverage in the area. And
Paterson is putting up a new marquee outside her store with a spot on it
to advertise store promotions. "I think life has gone on," says McKelvey.
"We've changed our habits some."
