---
headline: 'Strapped Local Sations Look to Web for Cash'
publication: 'Forbes'
---

Local television stations need some good news. Just this month, the
Television Bureau of Advertising announced spot TV advertising would fall
this year roughly 7% — despite the lucrative presidential election. Next
year looks bleak too: It predicted 7% to 11% declines. Those are big
numbers in an industry that's used to clearing roughly \$65 billion in
advertising.

While the decline is due in part to a recession, the bigger reason is more
systemic. Advertisers have more outlets than ever to choose from. So what
are local stations to do? Increasingly, they're turning for salvation in
the usual direction: the Internet.

There are reasons for stations' emboldened outlook. Ion Puspurica, who has
spent a decade helping build and manage hundreds of local television Web
sites, says some 30% of TV stations have managed to increase online
revenues to a point where they matter.

"If you get to the point where they can generate 5% or above on their
bottom line, then they really pay attention to you," Puspurica says. As
general manager of Critical Media's broadcast services group, he is now
selling a service to stations that simplifies their ability to post
broadcast video feeds on the Internet.

Driven by increased consumer use of online video over the last year and a
half, stations are pushing hard to turn it into a moneymaker. "We're
getting a lot of pressure from our clients to sell their Web sites, and to
sell them uniquely," says Garnett Losak, who's company, Petry Media, sells
advertising and builds programming schedules for local stations.

Many local stations not only compete with other stations, but also fight
with local newspapers for ad dollars. Every day a station doesn't push
more of its resources online is another day a competitor might. With fewer
and fewer viewers tuning in to local newscasts, Adam Symson, vice
president of interactive for E.W. Scripps' television division, which owns
10 stations, says building online audiences is imperative.

Consider ABC affiliate KCRG in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. While it internally
tracks an average of seven million unique visitors per month, and streams
its noon newscast to an average of 9,000 people per day, the two-year-old
site only earned some \$500,000 last year. "It's got to grow. It just
absolutely has to grow," says the station's general manager John Phelan,
noting there will be no real political ads next year.

He hopes to double revenue in 2009, and for several years thereafter, with
a new sales program. He's finalizing a system where his nine sales people
will be penalized if they do not meet monthly Web revenue goals. "At this
point, you have to try something different," he says.

Giving sales staff incentives to sell the Web remains a huge problem, says
Steve Ridge, president of media strategy at television consultancy Frank
N. Magid Associates. And there is no consistency on how to approach the
issue — whether via separate sales reps or a unified sales force.

But Web sites continue to be a bet on the future for most stations, rather
than a quick fix for flagging ad sales. "[Stations] don't realize how much
effort, resources and time it takes for that business to develop," says
Scott Blumenthal, executive vice president of television at Lin TV. His
company, which owns 29 local television stations, is very focused on the
Internet. While the company has struggled this year, digital has been a
bright spot, growing in the first nine months of the year to $19.7
  million, from$10.1 million last year.

Those are results other stations are likely looking to emulate. For
instance, Robert Forsyth, director of Internet operations at Albritton
Communications, says the company has spent the last year rebuilding the
technology system underlying its 12 Web properties, including eight
television stations. With 70,000 to 80,000 videos streaming from his sites
per month — many of which will soon be in high definition — and 75 to 100
new videos published per day, Forsyth says increasing online ad dollars
remains a priority for 2009.

But local advertising consultant Gordon Borrell of Borrell Associates says
he's worried some stations have a mismatched expectation for how quickly
the Internet can become a significant piece of their business.

His firm surveyed 647 television stations, and many are setting Web
budgets for next year based on massive increases in online revenue
expectations. In one case, the number is seven times greater than 2008
revenue. Borrell says, "I'm kinda wondering how they're going to do that."
