---
headline: 'Owning The News'
publication: 'Forbes'
---

Philip Balboni thinks he can build the next great global news organization
with the help of an unlikely ally: Capitalism.

The chief of Boston-based Global News Enterprises, Balboni is preparing to
launch a test version of his international news site later this fall, with
a full-scale debut in January. He's signed roughly 40 correspondents and
five regional editors with pedigrees ranging from Time Magazine to the
Associated Press. Reporters in Asia and Eastern Europe are up next.
Earlier this month, GNE stole Politico's Barbara Martinez as one of its
managing editors.

"We are journalist entrepreneurs, and we have to find new models for
journalism in the digital age," says Balboni.

He isn't alone. From Politico to Breaking Views to the Huffington Post to
thousands upon thousands of blogs, droves of journalists have fled
traditional newsrooms in the past decade looking for a way to make a
living from the exploding world of digital media. So far, precious few
have replicated the quality or impact — or profits — of the name-brand
companies they left behind.

But Balboni thinks he can, using the lure of ownership. His site is hiring
the five regional editors — for the Americas, Asia, Africa, Europe and the
Middle East — and some 72 correspondents located around the world. None of
them will be full-time employees. Instead, each is being lured by sizable
equity stakes (not stock options) and a five-year guarantee of monthly
fees of about \$1,000. Correspondents will report to regional editors, who
will report to the 15-person GNE.

"Foreign correspondents used to be the stars of journalism," he says. Now
cutbacks have left them starved for an outlet to fund — and market — their
reporting. He thinks he can turn it around and doesn't shy away from the
challenge. It isn't his first long shot. Previously, Balboni founded and
ran New England Cable News, a joint venture between Hearst Corporation and
Comcast that provides some 3.6 million homes with 24/7 regional news
programming.

But finding a large enough audience interested in international news to
support these journalists could be even more difficult. comScore reports
that U.S.-based traffic accounted for 1.8 million unique visitors to the
U.K. newspaper the Guardian in July. The numbers are far smaller in more
far-flung locales. For instance, Gurgaon, India-based the Times of India
had 321,000 unique U.S. visitors to its site in July. Moscow-based
RussiaToday.com had 183,000 and the site for Tel Aviv, Israel-based
Haaretz newspaper had 167,000.

Balboni knows that growing the audience — and advertising base — to the
size needed to pay for all this is risky, especially because he's focused
on coverage outside of popular locations like England. So, similar to the
model Politico is increasingly moving toward, GNE's multimedia content
will be sold to newspaper sites and other English-based sites around the
world. Balboni will only say syndicated content will be priced based on
circulation size and affordable to even his "distressed colleagues." One
large customer has already signed up, but Balboni won't identify it yet.

Beyond that, Balboni expects to experiment with "custom reporting" — an
on-demand service where clients can hire GNE correspondents to generate
custom news reports.

It may be awhile before any of these businesses return any money though,
and he knows it. Balboni is coasting on $8 million raised from private
  investors such as Amos Hostetter Jr., chairman of Pilot House Associates
  and the 147th richest American by our estimates, and Paul Sagan, president
  of Akamai Technologies. Balboni says he's hoping to hit the originally
  projected$10 million mark in funding, but he's been too busy hiring to
raise money lately, he says.

The media entrepreneur thinks he has time. Balboni claims he isn't angling
to quickly build and sell the company — another Silicon Valley mantra — to
Time Warner or The New York Times Company or News Corp. or anyone else.
But with all the stock he's been printing to acquire journalistic talent,
he says he knows his reporters and editors will be keenly focused on the
bottom line. Actually, he's counting on it.
