---
headline: 'EA standing firm on USD 26 offer'
publication: 'FT.com'
position: 'Staff reporter'
---

Electronic Arts (EA) is standing firm on its offer of USD 26 per share to
acquire rival Take Two Interactive Software, CFO Warren Jenson said in an
interview, dealReporter reported. Calling the number "hugely pre-emptive,"
he said Take Two’s demand for a higher bid was unrealistic.

Jenson declined to comment on whether management has discussed offering
more. Take Two’s stock price was USD 17.36 last Friday, the last trading
day before the offer was publicly disclosed.

Last week, a top Take Two shareholder told this news service that USD 30
per share was a more realistic price. He cited the upcoming 29 April
release of Grand Theft Auto 4 and other cost-cutting measures that Take
Two has said have not yet been recognized by the market.

"It’s a dance, right," said EA’s Jenson of Take Two’s rejection of the
offer. "There’s not a shred of historical evidence to show that is the
case," he said of assertions that Grand Theft Auto 4 sales would
dramatically change Take Two’s value.

As the seventh version of the game, Jenson said there is plenty of data to
predict sales. While he said EA may not dramatically increase its US and
UK sales, it could in more far-flung markets such as Spain or Russia.

"They’re [EA] very serious here," said Kaufman Brothers analyst Todd
Mitchell. "They took some money out of short term investments and put it
into cash." Still Mitchell said he remains unconvinced a deal will close
as the Take Two acquisition is not an imperative for EA.

"If they overpay for this thing, people are going to smell desperation,"
he said.
<br /> EA’s Jenson said it may drop the size of its bid if Take Two does
not act quickly enough.

He warned that the pressure is on to finish a deal in order to integrate
Take Two’s management into EA in time for this year’s holiday season. The
period can account for some 40% of video game sales, he said.

"We just don’t need both," he said in reference to overlap in EA’s and
Take Two’s management. Creative personnel may be a different story.

Rockstar Games – the Take Two publisher of the Grand Theft Auto series –
is a "significant part of this transaction," said Jenson. Yet the value of
Rockstar is said by some to be tightly aligned with Sam Houser, its
president, and his brother, Dan Houser, vp creative.

"Everyone acknowledges the Housers are the glue that keeps this [Grand
Theft Auto] together," said Michael Pachter, an analyst with Wedbush
Morgan Securities.

But it is unclear whether the two would be willing to move to EA –
particularly with a contract that is said to

give them a cut of gross revenues from Take Two’s Grand Theft Auto sales.
"The myth is they get 15% of revenues," said Pachter, "I think that’s
probably right."

With that standard dangling before employees – and a history of building
controversial themes such as sex into Grand Theft Auto – Pachter
questioned whether EA would want the two in-house. Earlier this week,
Pachter publicly suggested that EA split Rockstar off into a separate
company to avoid some of these issues.

"The analysts see Rockstar and they see risk," said EA’s Jenson. "We see
Rockstar and we see opportunity."

While he said he had some understanding of the Housers’ contracts, he
declined to specify what that was.

Instead, he said he believed that the Housers would be comfortable working
within EA.
