---
headline: 'Giving Physics A Good Name'
publication: 'Seton Hall Magazine'
---

There’s a bolt of pure lightning that plays music in the basement of
McNulty Hall.

At least, it looks like lightning. It pulses, and music plays out of the
thin air above it. Jose Lopez, the newest addition to Seton Hall’s
Department of Physics, shows visitors his plasma speaker with a smile. The
34-year-old assistant professor of physics likes a good attention-grabber.

“In physics, we have very bad PR. We make it seem that it’s not
accessible,” he says.

In a field forever dominated by Albert Einstein’s loopy personal style,
Lopez is an unexpected twist on the age-old vision of a brainy physicist.
The chatty Newark native is warm, amiable and plainspoken. And yet, one of
the 20 biggest brains in the state, according to Inside Jersey magazine,
is also an expert in a little-known, but potentially up-and-coming field
of study called microplasmas. Lopez creates these tiny plasma reactions in
order to assemble chemicals as if they were made of Lego blocks.

That’s not as crazy as it sounds. Most people know there are three states
of matter: solid, liquid and gas. Each is defined by the density and
arrangement of the atoms within it. Plasma is a fourth state that occurs
when gases destabilize. That means their atoms break up into a mixture of
charged ions and electrons.

Once free, these ions and electrons can be recombined into something new.
Lopez studies ways to control them. “That’s the whole thing,” says Alfred
Freilich, a longtime Lopez collaborator who joined Seton Hall with him in
2011

as a visiting research professor. It’s hard to reliably control plasma.
It’s hot — the sun and stars are made of it. And atoms like stability. On
Earth, they don’t shift to plasma easily. Generally, a vacuum is needed to
coax them. They shift to

it more easily in miniature. At scales of a millimeter or less, chemical
elements will become plasma in the open air and at a temperature cool
enough to touch.

As a result, there may be a lot of ways to put these tiny plasmas to work.
Lopez and Freilich look for them.

For instance, Degrémont Technologies uses their research to increase the
amount of oxygen it can turn into ozone inside of school bus-sized
microplasma reactors. Municipalities and other groups buy the reactors so
they can kill bacteria with ozone rather than chlorine at their
water-treatment plants. The ozone is produced on-site because it breaks
down soon after it’s created.

The oxygen alchemy is cool, but Lopez uses the reactors to connect more
than just electrons and ions.

He also uses them to connect with people. By forcing a lot of tiny oxygen
plasmas to create ozone, the reactors remind people that physics doesn’t
just explain how the universe works. It also offers keys for controlling
it.

So, when Degrémont asked for help on its microplasma reactors in 2005,
Lopez opted to make the field a long-term focus. At the time, he was
joining the physics faculty at his alma mater, Saint Peter’s University in
Jersey City, N.J.

That found the newly minted academic looking for a way to connect with
students directly.

Lopez already knew something about drawing students into science. Kurt
Becker, his doctoral adviser at the Stevens Institute of Technology in
Hoboken, N.J., noticed that shortly after Lopez arrived in 2000. Becker
often opened his lab to local high school and college students looking for
hands-on research experience. They all flocked to Lopez.

“It was almost his natural instinct to take them under his wing,” says
Becker.

That’s not surprising. By then, Lopez had been teaching science for years
— he tutored the entire women’s varsity basketball team in math and
science while a sophomore at Saint Peter’s.

But he did learn some new tricks under Becker, now the associate provost
for research and technology initiatives at the Polytechnic Institute of
New York University. Becker treated doctoral students like colleagues, not
employees. He encouraged them to story their own interests, and tried to
get them whatever they needed to do it.

“If someone had a good idea, my attitude was: Go try it out,” he says.

Becker’s stance had a long-term effect on Lopez. Nothing is out of reach.
Last spring, he applied the theory to one of his first courses at Seton
Hall. Rather than limiting his class on waves and oscillations to the
university’s labs, he added a set of online video lectures from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

The result really stood out to junior Stacie Ballou. The lectures gave her
a first-hand look at the type of experiments normally confined to big
research universities. “It was a different experience,” she says.

For Lopez, that was the point. Students aren’t unlike the chemicals he
assembles in microplasma.

They’re ready to become something new — if you can connect with them.
