---
headline: The Bone Doctor's Knees
publication: Seton Hall Magazine
position: 'Freelance'
---

It all started in the mid-’70s on scrap paper: cocktail napkins, lined
yellow paper, whatever was near. Frederick Buechel ’67, M.D., and Michael
Pappas, Ph.D., were designing artificial joints. They worked on schematics
wherever they were, sometimes even at a bar near their homes in northern
New Jersey. For Buechel, the work has never been far from his mind.

“To this day, you’ll see a piece of paper on his desk with a drawing on
it,” says his son, Frederick Buechel Jr., M.D. That’s no surprise. His
father is the co-inventor of one

of the world’s best-known artificial knees. It was one of the first to
truly simulate the real thing — bending up and down while also twisting a
little left and right as people walk. A version of it has been sold by
DePuy Orthopaedics for more than 30 years. First known as the New Jersey
Knee, it’s now called the N.J. LCS® Mobile Bearing Total Knee System.

“You should allow the ligaments and muscles to act in their own normal
way,” says Buechel Sr., 67.

While DePuy, now part of Johnson & Johnson, doesn’t discuss market share,
it has been reported that the LCS Knee has been chosen by a million people
worldwide. That’s a number that could grow rapidly. Knee replacements are
increasingly common. Between 2000 and 2011, the number of operations grew
almost 130 percent, the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons says,
with more than 600,000 done each year in the U.S. alone.

“It’s a hot topic,” says Daniel Brown, an orthopedic devices analyst at
Millennium Research Group.

There are at least two reasons. People younger than 65 increasingly want
to temper sport and other high-impact injuries, and those who are older
are staying active longer.

But, in 1974, none of that was true yet.

Buechel, then a 28-year-old orthopedic resident at New Jersey Medical
School (now a part of Rutgers University) was overseeing a research
project on an ankle-replacement device. “Many of these were developed in
personal labs, almost in garages,” says Stuart Hirsch, M.D., a clinical
professor of orthopedics at Seton Hall’s School of Health and Medical
Sciences.

The orthopedic surgeon has known Buechel since organizing a panel of knee
designers for the New Jersey Orthopaedic Society about 30 years ago. Other
presenters had more elite credentials, but Buechel’s dynamic,
data-driven presentation stood out. “I immediately switched over to the
New Jersey Knee,” says Hirsch.

When Buechel first began work on his ankle replacement he sought help from
Pappas, at the time a 41-year-old mechanical engineer teaching at New
Jersey Medical School. “Any problem that I’m capable of solving is of
interest,” says Pappas, now 80.

Buechel’s decision to ask for help wasn’t entirely surprising. The young
doctor, who won four New Jersey Amateur Athletic Union and three
Metropolitan Intercollegiate Wrestling Championships while at Seton
Hall, liked a challenge — if evenly matched. Once he started working on
the replacement ankle, he realized he wasn’t well matched; he hadn’t
thought about the technical aspects of building the device.

Pappas’s engineering know-how evened the odds.

By 1976, the two men were building joints on their own time. Their focus
shifted to shoulders, and they were also considering the knee. Then, good
luck struck. Buechel presented a paper about their shoulder at a
conference, and caught the attention of an executive from DePuy, who
wanted to license it.

Buechel saw his shot, and made DePuy promise to sign a contract to sell
his artificial knee too. Bold move, as there was no knee yet.

But DePuy agreed.
“You can’t live without being a business person,” says Buechel.

Development began. Buechel defined problems, Pappas designed solutions. At
the time, artificial knees had two major components. One attached to the
femur, a hip-to-knee bone; the other to the tibia, a knee-to-ankle bone.
These “fixed-bearing knees” bent like a hinge, but Bueche and Pappas
weren’t satisfied by the results. Then a new idea arrived from a group
from Oxford in the United Kingdom. It offered a way to make a knee that
could both bend and turn a bit. Buechel and Pappas quickly adopted this
“mobile-bearing” design, and worked to improve it.

By 1977, their mobile-bearing knees were a lot like the real thing, and in
theory, would last longer than the fixed-bearing kind. DePuy, which sells
both types, says one independent study found that, after 15 years of use,
Buechel’s LCS Knee still was in good shape 97 percent of the time.

(The Buechel-Pappas partnership with DePuy ended some time ago, but the
men still work together on their own.)

Still, knees are big business, and the technology keeps improving. Debates
about which type is best remain some of the hottest at orthopedic
conferences today, says Millennium’s Brown, the device analyst.

Buechel, always ready for a good challenge, is prepared to defend the
merits of his knee.

The doctor clearly likes his odds.
