---
headline: 'Cracking the College Code'
publication: 'Seton Hall Magazine'
---

Last winter, 15 students from Newark’s Technology High School took part in
a six-month pilot program from Seton Hall’s Center for Mobile Research and
Innovation. The “Young Developers Program” had a simple, yet important
goal: prepare the students — who hail from a traditionally underprivileged
community — to design and build mobile apps for smartphones and tablet
computers on their own.

“That’s of value no matter what you decide to do,” says associate
professor of political science Michael Taylor, the CMRI’s academic
director.

That’s probably true. Mobile devices are booming. In 2007, smartphones
were relatively rare and tablet computers were non-existent. Today, just
six years later, the United States has amassed 140 million smartphone and
123 million tablet users, reports eMarketer, a tech consultant. As a
result, these devices have penetrated nearly every walk of life.

But not all teens are being given the skills and confidence needed to
harness these forces.

The Young Developers program was designed to help by teaching students
from disadvantaged areas to build mobile apps — a form of software — for
smartphones and tablets. Each of its 12 lessons, which range from computer
logic

to user interfaces, includes a video lecture, in-class coding problem and
take-home lab. A \$250,000 corporate gift from AT&T paid for the
curriculum, as well as smartphones and laptop-tablet hybrids running
Microsoft Windows.

The Newark Tech teens were also responsible for building their own mobile
apps. All told, it was a lot of work.

To keep them on track, the students were paired with mentors from Seton
Hall who had a similar socio-economic background. “I’ve lived in poverty,
and I’ve seen poverty,” says Franck Nelson ’13, one of the six
undergraduate mentors.

A biology major, Nelson immigrated from Haiti to Trenton, N.J., when he
was 14. He joined the Young Developers pilot to offer tangible proof that
nothing is out of reach. While the program’s focus is on coding, Nelson,
who just started a graduate program at Seton Hall’s College of Nursing,
says mentors spent as much time talking about college.

“We had people believe in us to get here,” he says. “We believe we can
return the favor.”

Taylor, who is now running a second pilot project in Newark and trying to
raise more money from AT&T to expand to two more cities in the next year,
says the program’s first run ended with an unexpected surprise. He wasn’t
sure if all the teens would finish their software. But they did, on their
own or in a small group, building 12 apps. “A lot of them weren’t
satisfied by what they created,” he adds.

That’s just fine. Now they know how to do better.
