---
headline: 'Adventures in State Bailouts'
publication: 'Slate'
---

Two months after being laid off by Forbes, I discovered New York's Self
Employment Assistance Program. The problem was getting the state itself to
discover it.

The program is offered by New York to help entrepreneurs launch new
businesses while refunding tax dollars (the state calls them unemployment
benefits). I learned of it on the 14th page of an instruction manual that
was sent to me when I applied for unemployment.

The SEAP program sounded like a good deal to help me launch myself as a
Web video news anchor covering media news. It's been my beat for a while.
I felt good about it. This is the era of government bailouts and stimulus
packages, after all. I couldn't know that my first significant interaction
with government would lead me on a series of adventures involving baffled
state employees and a constant sense of amazement.

I had my first adventure with New York on a Thursday afternoon in
mid-March. I called the number listed for SEAP and learned the state had
created the world's premier choose-your-own-adventure series using a voice
mail messaging system. There was a dizzying array of options to choose
from, each one leading to more options. It had no end. I cycled past level
after level about filing new claims, frequently asked questions, and how
part-time work affects benefits.

I hung up once, redialed, and started again (I had gotten lost), and just
when I had lost hope, I met Charles. He had to go ask his manager about
SEAP. I waited on the phone until he came back to explain I had to go to
an unemployment office to apply. Once there, I would be given a quiz, and
my answers would be scored to see if I qualified. Charles then gave me two
addresses, one in Midtown Manhattan and the other in Harlem.

The next day, I set off for 247 W. 54th St. to take my quiz. That's when I
experienced my second adventure. Charles had sent me to a hole in the
ground. It was a massive two-story pit that stretched along one-third of
the block. To clarify, that's three full-length buildings. I did the only
thing I could. I tried calling a new number in the instruction manual for
help.

A man at Manhattan's Board of Elections picked up and promptly hung up on
me when I insisted he not give me the automated phone number for the
Department of Labor that I'd tried on Thursday. He didn't seem to know or
care about SEAP.

Then I tried a police station near the hole. The precinct gave me a
telephone number that was disconnected. The automated message instructed
me to call a third number, which is how I came to talk to someone at the
Department of Labor's fraud division. It was early afternoon.

Unemployment: That building was knocked down two years ago.
Me: So it seems.

Unemployment: Who sent you there? Me: Your office—the Department of Labor
in Albany—yesterday afternoon.

Unemployment: Who?
Me: Charles.
Unemployment: Charles? What was his last name?
Me: I didn't ask.
Unemployment: Why not?
Me: I didn't think he'd send me to an empty lot.

There was a pause. Not only had the woman never heard of SEAP, but she
clearly doubted it existed. Apparently, no one ever used it to defraud New
York state. That would have made me feel good if I hadn't begun doubting
whether anyone ever used it. Eventually, she gave me some more Department
of Labor offices and phone numbers in New York City. None of them matched
Charles'.

For some reason, I decided to give him another shot. What were the chances
of being sent to two holes? On Monday morning, prepared for my third
adventure, I trekked back to the West Side and up to 215 W. 125th St.
Workforce (that's what New York calls the unemployment division) was on
the sixth floor. The receptionist behind the counter was very friendly. I
asked for SEAP, prepared to explain what it was. "Oh, SEAP! You have to
come back on Friday at 10. That's when we do that."

I looked at her. Then I told her I'd just been sent to an empty lot on
Friday. "Would you like to talk to someone about that?" she asked. Why,
yes, I would. "Just have a seat and wait for the next Workforce
orientation session. Afterward you can talk to a manager." I left.

I was back on Friday at 9:30 a.m. The receptionist was delighted that I
was so early. At a quarter to 10, Simone emerged from the back and called
my name. I could just feel that this was to be my final adventure with New
York state. Surely, victory was at hand. As we walked to her desk, she
explained she only did SEAP at 10 and didn't normally start early. I
thanked her. The office was a beehive of activity—it looked like the
trading floor of the New York Stock Exchange. Workers were everywhere,
talking with one another excitedly about how to get people back to work. I
felt really good about my taxes.

Simone explained SEAP as we walked. It sounded nothing like Charles'
description. I would fill out a paper form at her desk that she would
submit to Albany. If I was lucky, that form would trigger an invitation
that would be mailed to me within the next two weeks. I should then attend
one of the regular orientation meetings for SEAP, where I would be given a
folder. In the folder would be an application, which I should fill out and
submit to Albany. At some point—Simone didn't know when—I'd receive word
if I qualified. I'd have to wait to start my media business until after
this process was complete. I smiled and thanked her. I left and prepared
to go it alone.

Postscript: Two weeks later, I got a letter in the mail about SEAP. I was
invited to attend an orientation meeting on April 27. Following the
invitation was a note: "One of the criteria to qualify for SEAP is a
worker re-employment score of 70 or higher. Your score is 66."
