---
headline: 'Charting an East/West Passage'
publication: 'The Darden Report'
position: 'Freelance'
---

In both the East and the West, it was hard to believe the story.

At a factory in Shenzen, China, at least 14 workers killed themselves in 2010. The factory, owned by Foxconn, produces iPads and iPhones for Apple and computers for Dell and Hewlett-Packard. By most accounts, the manufacturers’ unrelenting production demands had triggered the spate of
suicides.

So, who’s responsible? The Western companies, who rely increasingly on
Eastern contractors to produce their products for low wages and low
prices? Or the Eastern manufacturer, whose plant managers and workers face
incredible pressure to meet ambitious deadlines?

In his strategic management course “Strategic Thinking: Integrating East
and West” this past spring, Darden School of Business Professor Ming-Jer
Chen asked his students to opine on the issue.

“Chinese managers are shifting to the Western culture of produce,
produce, produce,” said Kristyn Kelly of the Class of 2011. “It’s the sort
of hyper-productivity that only works if people are ready, willing and
able to say ‘no.’” But Kelly says many Asians — long accustomed to rigid
hierarchies — simply won’t say no. This time, the cultural clash appeared to have contributed to the tragedy.

The Foxconn case spotlights the challenges Eastern and Western managers
face as they blend their businesses.

And Chen is the perfect person to steer the conversation.

**A New Discipline**

Chen’s work and life focus on balance. He grew up in Taitung on the
southeast coast of Taiwan. As a youth, he studied philosophy and the
Chinese classics with a cousin of Puyi, “The Last Emperor” of China. In
1981, Chen emigrated to the United States with a visionary quest: to “make
the world smaller.”

Before joining the Darden faculty in 2001, he was a professor at Columbia
Business School and was founding director of the Global Chinese Business
Initiative at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.

Chen focuses on ways to help managers combine the cultures, to narrow the
East-West divide. “I very much consider myself an academic entrepreneur,”
says Chen. And he’s a rather bold one. This summer, the management
professor will blaze a new trail.

As vice president and program chair of the Academy of Management, Chen —
who will assume presidency of the group in 2012 — at this year’s annual
conference intends to ask business scholars from around the world to study
Eastern and Western management techniques. His goal: find ways to
characterize and quantify their di erences so executives can incorporate
the best — and avoid the worst — of each.

“Ming-Jer has put his finger on a very important question,” says Jan
Rivkin, the Bruce V. Rauner professor and chair of Harvard Business
School’s strategy unit. “Can a superior model of management emerge from
combining the best of both worlds?”

The academy conference should help Chen and his colleagues around the
globe find an answer. In August, the meeting will host more than 11,000 of
the organization’s 19,000 members. Among its ranks, the 75-year-old group
counts some of the world’s top scholars. For five days, they’ll meet in
San Antonio, Texas, to discuss the theme “West Meets East: Enlightening,
Balancing and Transcending.”

The topic’s timing may be just right. “The United States still has the
best business system, but the system has also shown its vulnerability,”
explains Chen.

In 2008, a period of financial chicanery abruptly ended when the bubble it
created in the U.S. housing market popped. Many still feel the e ects of
the recession that followed its explosion.

“Because the economies in the West are soft, there are Westerners moving
here,” says Darden alumnus Peabody Hutton (MBA/JD ’77), general counsel of
Ajia Partners, a Hong Kong investment firm. Hutton says that for American
Asians to set up shop on Eastern shores is not uncommon.

That’s one reason Chen thinks the market is ready to formally expand its
horizons.

He may be right. Harvard’s Rivkin leads the academy committee that
decides which sessions to feature during the annual meeting’s full-day
“All-Academy Theme” program. Proposals have ranged from whether Asian
business schools should follow a Western model to yoga’s impact on an
organization’s e ectiveness.

The variety of the proposed topics suggests that people may be ready for
new ideas. “For a long time, there was an assumption that Western
management was good management,” Rivkin says.

That may be changing, but can still be a hard sell.

**Defining the Eastern Paradox**

Easterners and Westerners think differently.
The Foxconn suicides were a somber reminder of that. Yet these differences are often expressed more subtly than through questions
about workers’ rights.

“Business [here] tends to be conducted less on the basis of merit and
price than on the basis of relationships,” says Ajia’s Hutton. The results
can be unpredictable.

To help explain the cultural nuances, Chen has lately been publishing
about an idea he calls “transparadox.”

It’s designed to o er Westerners a new way to think about ideas that
appear to contradict each other but which may be two sides of the same
coin. In essence, transparadox proposes that notions that appear to be
oppositional — such as competition and cooperation — are interrelated or
even interdependent, connected by a series of implicit links. Chen seeks
to bridge a fundamental philosophical difference between the way
Easterners and Westerners regard paradox. “By making these links
explicit,” says Chen, “we can enhance a mutual understanding that di
erences are not irreconcilable.”

“The Chinese are used to ambiguity,” says Hutton. Chen says there are
plenty of reasons for Westerners to get used to it, and

money is a big one.
Traditionally, a corporation’s finances were managed at its

Western headquarters, says Leslie Grayson, professor emeritus of
international business at Darden for whom Chen’s academic chair is named.
Today, funds may move between foreign territories without passing
through the West.

As a result, Easterners and Westerners have good reason to adapt to one
another.

“If you don’t learn, there’s a penalty,” says Grayson. “You fail.”

**Measuring Ambiculturality**

Given their philosophical di erences, how do Easterners and Westerners
successfully combine their management strategies?

The answer could become one of Chen’s biggest hits. Last November, he
publicly coined a term that may ultimately define not only this summer’s
academy conference but also the study of Eastern and Western management as
a whole: ambicultural.

It reads like intellectual popcorn. Say it aloud and ideas like
ambidexterity and cultural sensitivity come easily to mind. “The basic
premise is that each culture in society has its own strengths and
weaknesses when they’re applied to business practices,” Chen explains.
Combining the best parts of each approach is ambicultural.

But this involves a trick. Strengths cannot be combined and weaknesses
avoided until they’ve been defined. So the professor is creating a survey
to be sent to Eastern and Western managers later this year that he thinks
will do just that.

For instance, the survey may ask executives to rate the importance they
place on personal connections, and to numerically prioritize their
interest in employees, stakeholders and society.

“I think there will be many di erent ways we can quantify the variables
that can reveal how ambicultural a company is,” Chen says. Already, he
hopes to create a scale for companies to rate their use of cross-cultural
management strategies.

This wouldn’t be the first time Chen has developed a way to quantify the
seemingly unquantifiable. In the mid-1980s, he spent months analyzing a
database of airline industry events that were covered by the trade
newspaper Aviation Daily. Thousands of articles were scored against
variables, such as “event visibility” or “response announcement speed,”
that Chen helped pioneer as a way to study airline competition over an
eight-year period.

The database made the competitive patterns that businesses fall into clear
enough to study — and often, to predict.

The result: A popular new area of strategic theory named competitive
dynamics emerged over the past 25 years in the management field and
continues to thrive today. Competitive dynamics is the analysis of
competition at the action and response level to predict how a firm will
act or react toward opponents.

**An Eastern or Western Face?**

All the signs suggest “ambicultural” will be as big a hit.

The concept is not even a year old, yet management expertsare already
starting to buzz about it.

In March, an Asian edition of the Harvard Business Review translated the word into Chinese. Now, the editors of the U.S. edition are
talking to Chen about producing their own story on it. And next year, many
business students will study the term in the new edition of a well-known
textbook on strategic management.

The word’s surging popularity isn’t surprising. People are hungry for ways
to sail between the East and West more easily.

“Right now, what we need to do is to compare management systems from one
country [against those of] another country,” says Grayson.

The hard part is doing that without judging the results harshly. Consider
job interviews. Grayson says that rather than just examining competence,
Asian companies focus on learning “who” they are considering hiring. This
may entail asking questions some Western countries deem illegal, such as
whether the candidate is married or plans on having children.

Chen’s ideas can’t solve legal problems like those, but they may help
managers bridge the cultural chasm underlying them. Still, it’s a big task
— certainly too big for one man to perform alone, and the strategy expert
has no intention of trying to do so single-handedly. Rather, his plan is
to work through the Academy of Management to expose his colleagues to a
framework they can use to study it on their own. The approach already
seems to be working.

Darden student Kelly — who worked for the U.S. Navy before coming to
Darden and studying Foxconn with Chen — says he opened her eyes to the
East.

“We’re still viewing China through a Western lens,” she says. “We’re not
viewing the Chinese as partners.”
