---
headline: 'Is the Wine Trade Recession-Proof?'
publication: 'The Darden Report'
position: 'Freelance'
---

NO ONE GOT A CHANCE to put away the crate of Tignanello when it first
arrived at Young’s Fine Wines. Its six \$109 bottles of wine barely had a
chance to rest on the Manhasset, New York storeroom floor. Two hours
later, every bottle had been bought. That was two years ago, long before
the pain of recession set into people’s minds.

These days, Young’s wealthy Long Island clientele of Wall Street bankers
and Madison Avenue advertising executives aren’t so quick to spend so big.
That’s why the store is pushing wines ranging in price from $15 to \$25
from a huge stock that regularly runs over 3,000 bottles. “At some point,
people are going to buy less,” said Young’s President Edward Wassmer (TEP
’95).

Without a doubt, the recession has sharpened the senses and tightened the
wallets of almost everyone. Like Wassmer, people throughout the wine trade
are struggling to find ways to maintain sales without just slashing
prices. While some markets, such as luxury clothing, have already moved to
massive discounts in the face of an economizing public, the wine industry
hopes it can buck the trend—or at least embrace it slowly.

“People are going to continue to drink. I think it’s one of our national
pastimes, isn’t it?” asked Gene Meoni, general manager of hospitality for
the Darden School Foundation, which includes a pub and a 300-seat dining
room. Recent sales at wine retailers suggest he’s right. They increased by 4.9 percent year-over-year to $8.2 billion for the 52 weeks ending January 10 (which includes the lucrative holiday season), according to Nielsen Scantrak. Indeed, for the four weeks ending January 10—just after the recession became official—retail sales grew 7.6 percent to \$810 million.

Still, pressure remains high to retain a big cut of those numbers.
“Everybody can dance around it, but retailers want sharply reduced
prices,” said Jack Kennard (MBA ’73), a senior vice president at Brown-Forman, one of the largest producers of wine and spirits in the world.
Kennard argues that giving into widespread and deep price reductions is a
mistake that will permanently undermine a business’s product and a brand’s
health. “Deep discounting is highly destructive to brand equity over the
long term,” he said.

As of early February, Brown-Forman was resisting deep price cuts. Instead,
the company was enticing sales by developing limited-time marketing
programs geared toward adding value at the point of purchase. For example,
some wines now include stemware boxed in gift sets, and the company is
creating more attractive gift cards and packaging to encourage sales.
Whether people will buy the strategy for long is hard to say, as no one
knows just how bad the economy will get—or when it will get better.

One thing is already clear, though— cheaper is better as far as consumers
are concerned. Nielsen reports that the $3.00 – \$5.99 category of wine
bottles saw the strongest year-over-year growth at 12.9 percent to \$189
million for the four weeks ending January 10. Yet wines costing \$15 or
more grew only 3.7 percent to \$120 million during the same period. Indeed,
that was the only price range to shrink last fall as the economic strength
of the U.S. plummeted, dropping 0.5 percent to \$311 million over the 13
weeks ending January 10.

Without a doubt, premium wines are in a tough spot. Judith Fowler (MBA
’81), owner of the Clevedon, New Zealand– based winery Puriri Hills, knows
that only too well. With just 12,000 bottles of wine coming out of her
winery a year, Fowler agrees that cutting the price of her three labels,
which range from $25 to \$150 in the U.S., is a bad idea. “The price point
has to say something about quality,” she said. A strategy of massive price
discounting is incompatible with the small volumes produced.

Though the pressure is on, the 13-year- old winery is standing behind its
conviction that “handmade, estate-bottled wines such as ours are becoming
more desirable as people shift from industrially produced foods to
artisanal foods, even in the current tough market environment.” Puriri
Hills views the recession as an opportunity to grow within its market
segment, and the winery has found some palatable ways to inspire sales.
Late last year, Fowler began giving some distributors price breaks or
credits for local taxes to help keep them in business to sell her cases.

“You have to encourage your middle men in this kind of a time,” she said.
For instance, Fowler did not raise prices on a distributor in one Asian
market whose native currency strengthened as much as 50 percent in the
last year against the New Zealand dollar. Though the distributor is e
ectively paying half as much for the same goods, keeping him on has helped
Puriri Hills maintain and create sales in a tough environment.

Those same currency fluctuations may also help Puriri Hills increase its
distribution. The New Zealand dollar has weakened by as much as 40 percent
against the U.S. dollar in the last year, so Fowler is now looking into
selling her wines in the U.S., in states beyond her native Virginia. As of
February, she was talking with her son—who distributes Puriri Hills in the
U.S.—about selling them in New York City and Chicago. “You look for the
specific place where the customers want something unusual,” she said.

She may be on to something at a time when bars and restaurants are already
struggling to keep business up, said Darden’s Meoni. Wine sales are often
an important component of their revenues because of what can be an
extremely high markup on each bottle. But with people spending carefully,
Meoni said both groups are thirsty for unusual labels from places such as
New Zealand that can sustain a similar markup at a lower price than super-high premium wines. “There’s a lot of stu that isn’t mainstream that is a very, very good value,” he said.

Still, there is a strong demand for cheaper wines. That’s a big reason
Pleasant Valley Wine Company President Mike Doyle (MBA ’66) said business
is booming right now. While the winery sells some of its own labels, much
of its business comes from producing wines for third parties whose bottles
generally run less than $20. “This is usually a slow time of year, and we’re pretty busy,” said Doyle. In fact, there are more opportunities than he can keep up with at the moment. And why not—he said most people can’t tell the difference between a \$25 and a \$125 bottle of Merlot.

Brown-Forman’s Kennard doesn’t entirely agree. The “trade-down” effect,
as the industry likes to call it, is only temporary, he said. By shying
away from expensive wines and spirits, people aren’t casting a vote
against the premium brands they’ve been loyal to for many years. “They
just simply feel it’s not right for them right now as they attempt to
economize,” he said. “Luxury brands are ‘worn’ by consumers like badges,
and premium sector wine and spirits consumers look forward rather
hopefully to better times when they will confidently express themselves
through luxury brands again.”

Wassmer of Young’s Fine Wines echoes the sentiment, but said these days he
needs to go with the flow. Despite strong sales in 2007, he decided it was
time to plan for a recession two years ago. Wall Street’s violent
reactions to small slips in sales were one reason why. “You could see
people with just a little bit of softness were in a scramble,” he said. So
he cut back buying some popular—and pricey—vintages.

And he did something curious: he started hiring. With some wine
discounters nearby, competing on price alone was unlikely without a lot of
attention to service and selection. “There’s really no way to e ectively
sell that many items [over 3,000 bottles], but put out ‘shelf talkers’ to
get the job done,” said Wassmer. Last year, he boosted the sales sta from
one full time person and two part-timers to three full time people and one
part-timer, and developed a nine-week training course for them known as
“Young’s U.”

There are early signs it’s working. An increase in customer count in
January—a traditionally weak month—of 11 percent to 7,684 people helped
cushion a drop in sales of roughly one percent. In fairness, the recession
may be supercharging the strategy, driving people into retailers like
Young’s as they limit visits to bars and restaurants. Still, Wassmer said
the increase in count is a big reason he’s cautiously optimistic about 2009. But just in case, Wassmer may have hit upon a new way to ultimately
lower some of the costs involved in educating his clientele—Internet
video.

The store just launched a web-based video series named “Wine in a Minute.”
Each short spot—which takes a day and a half to prepare—encourages
customers to try new wines by educating them about new options. Right now,
Wassmer is not measuring the return on investment, but he’s already
optimistic about the low-cost video programming based on anecdotal
feedback from customers. “It’s constantly a game of keeping your consumer
excited and educated,” he said. 

And coming back for more.
